subsys: uart_async_adapter: Provide UART Async Adapter (#14490)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: doc/nrf/libraries/others/uart_async_adapter.rst

.. _lib_uart_async_adapter:

UART async adapter
##################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

UART async adapter library works as an interface between interrupt-driven API of a UART device and software that is using the asynchronous API interface.

.. note::
   The current implementation is :ref:`experimental <software_maturity>`.

Overview
********

Zephyr provides the following three different ways to access a UART peripheral:

* Pooling API
* Interrupt-driven API
* Asynchronous API

While most of the UART drivers provide all three APIs, some drivers still do not provide the asynchronous UART API.
An example of such a driver is USB CDC ACM.
The UART async adapter library is initialized with a UART device and communicates with it using the interrupt-driven API, providing an asynchronous API for the application.

This removes the need to implement two ways of interfacing with UART devices in software.
When using the UART async adapter library, the software only needs to implement interaction with a UART device using the asynchronous API and just initialize the adapter for the ones that do not support it.

Requirements
************

> To use the library, you need to enable the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_UART_ASYNC_API` and :kconfig:option:`UART_INTERRUPT_DRIVEN` Kconfig options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use the library, you need to enable the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_UART_ASYNC_API` and :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_UART_INTERRUPT_DRIVEN` Kconfig options.
```

.. _lib_uart_async_adapter:

> UART Async Adapter

Author: This one is tricky. We are using both convention in our code. I would preffer to use UART Async Adapter as it differentiates inside the documentation.
Why `UART Async adapter` - what is the reasoning for that?

> UART Async Adapter

Reviewer 2: From Jamie Nøvik: "Maybe a dumb question, but is 'async' needed since that's part of UART? I'm not finding many hits on 'UART async adapter', but my initial impression is #2 (UART async adapter) looks correct as this seems like a common noun."

##################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

> UART Async Adapter works as an interface between UART device Interrupt-driven API and a software that is using Asynchronous API interface.

Author: Waiting to agree about the capitalizing the name

.. note::
   The current implementation is classified with :ref:`experimental <software_maturity>` software maturity.

Overview
********

Zephyr provides three different ways to access the UART peripheral.

1. Pooling API
2. Interrupt-driven API
3. Asynchronous API

While most of the UART drivers provides all the APIs, there are some that are still not providing Asynchronous UART API.
The sample of such a driver is USB CDC ACM driver.
It provides Pooling API and Interrupt-driven API, not implementing Asynchronous API.

> The UART Async Adapter is initialized with such an UART device and communicates with it using Interrupt-driven API, providing Asynchronous API for the application.

Author: We have to agree about capitalizing the name

The reason for is is to remove the need to implement two ways of interfacing UART devices in software.

> By the usage of UART Async Adapter software needs only to implement interraction with UART device by the Asynchronous API and just initialize the adapter for the ones that does not support it.

Author: We have to agree about capitalizing the name

Requirements
************

> To be able to use the library UART asynchronous and interrupt driven APIs need to be available.
> It means :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_UART_ASYNC_API` and :kconfig:option:`UART_INTERRUPT_DRIVEN`options need to be enabled.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To use the library, you need to enable the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_UART_ASYNC_API` and :kconfig:option:`UART_INTERRUPT_DRIVEN` Kconfig options.
```

It is also required to enable :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SERIAL_SUPPORT_INTERRUPT` option.

Configuration
*************

Use the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_UART_ASYNC_ADAPTER` Kconfig option to enable the library in the build system.

Usage
*****

To use the UART Async Adapter use the following code pattern:

.. code-block:: c

    #include <uart_async_adapter.h>

    ...
    /* Get the UART device we want to use */
    static const struct device *uart = DEVICE_DT_GET([UART device name]);

    /* Create UART Async Adapter instance */
    UART_ASYNC_ADAPTER_INST_DEFINE(async_adapter);

    /* UART initialization (called before any UART usage) */
    static int uart_init(void)
    {
        if (!uart_test_async_api(uart)) {
		/* Implement API adapter */
		uart_async_adapter_init(async_adapter, uart);
		uart = async_adapter;
	}
	/* Continue initialization using Asynchronous API on uart device */
	(...)
    }

Note that using the adapter in a way shown above the adapter usage it totally transparent for the application.

> If the selected UART device provides Asynchronous API, not adapter is initialized.
> If the selected UART device does not provide Asynchronous API, the adapter is initialized to use such a device and then the direct pointer to the device is replaced by the adapter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the selected UART device provides the asynchronous API, the adapter is not initialized.
If the selected UART device does not provide the asynchronous API, the adapter is initialized to use such a device and a direct pointer to the device is replaced by the adapter.
```
"such a device" meaning?

Samples using the library
*************************

The following |NCS| samples use this library:

> * peripheral_uart_

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* :ref:`peripheral_uart`
```

Limitations
***********

> The usage of the adapter adds code and performance overhead over direct usage of UART Asynchronous API provided by the driver.
> For the UART drivers that are only providing Interrupt-driven API it is also wise to consider using it directly in the application.
> The real usage of this adapter would be to support multiple UART devices with only support for one API inside application, speeding up the development process in a cost of performance and code size.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using this library adds code and performance overhead over direct usage of UART asynchronous API provided by the driver.
For UART drivers that only provide the interrupt-driven API, consider using it directly in the application.
The library supports multiple UART devices with only one API in the application, speeding up the development process.
```

Author: Last one rather:
The library allows the usage of UART devices with different APIs with only one API in the application, speeding up the development process.

The reason for the change - changed description does not point out that we are targeting different APIs. We can use multiple UART devices with only one API in the application as long as they are all providing the same API.

Reviewer 2: How about: The library allows *using* UART devices with different APIs with only one API in the application...

Dependencies
************

> This module may use Zephyr logging subsystem.

Reviewer 2: Link to the subsystem? Maybe :ref:`Zephyr logging API <zephyr:logging_api>`? Or something else?

> No other dependencds.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

API documentation
*****************

| Header file: :file:`include/uart_async_adapter.h`
| Source files: :file:`subsys/uart_async_adapter/`

> .. doxygengroup:: uart_async_adapter

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. doxygengroup:: uart_async_adapter_lib
```

   :local:
   :depth: 2

UART async adapter library works as an interface between interrupt-driven API of a UART device and software that is using the asynchronous API interface.

.. note::
   The current implementation is :ref:`experimental <software_maturity>`.

Overview
********

Zephyr provides the following three different ways to access a UART peripheral:

* Pooling API
* Interrupt-driven API
* Asynchronous API

While most of the UART drivers provide all three APIs, some drivers still do not provide the asynchronous UART API.
An example of such a driver is USB CDC ACM.
The UART async adapter library is initialized with a UART device and communicates with it using the interrupt-driven API, providing an asynchronous API for the application.

This removes the need to implement two ways of interfacing with UART devices in software.
When using the UART async adapter library, the software only needs to implement interaction with a UART device using the asynchronous API and just initialize the adapter for the ones that do not support it.

Requirements
************

Enabling this library would also enable the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SERIAL_SUPPORT_ASYNC` Kconfig option.

> Without support for UART async API, this library does not even compile.

Reviewer: This is not really a requirement that the user needs to meet. Is it actually needed to provide such information here?

> You also need to enable the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SERIAL_SUPPORT_INTERRUPT` option.

Reviewer: How is the user supposed to enable the option when it has no prompt? Shouldn't instead `depends on SERIAL_SUPPORT_INTERRUPT` be added to `UART_ASYNC_ADAPTER`?

Author: Any driver that supports interrupt driven API needs to be enabled. I will rewrite this part of the documentation.

Configuration
*************

Use the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_UART_ASYNC_ADAPTER` Kconfig option to enable the library in the build system.

Usage
*****

See the following code snippet to learn how to use this library:

.. code-block:: c

    #include <uart_async_adapter.h>

    ...
    /* Get the UART device we want to use */

>     static const struct device *uart = DEVICE_DT_GET([UART device name]);

Reviewer: The parameter for `DEVICE_DT_GET()` is not a UART device name but its devicetree node identifier.
